Kate Middleton’s uncle Gary Goldsmith drops a truth bomb on Celebrity Big Brother UK
NZ Herald
9 Mar, 2024 11:02 AM
2 mins to read
Save
Share
Play Video
ITN
Kensington Palace responds to rumours about Princess Kate’s health
2 weeks ago
1:54
Princess Kate’s uncle Gary Goldsmith has responded to questions over her disappearance, and his bizarre answers have sparked concern.

Goldsmith, who is on this season’s Celebrity Big Brother UK, was asked by fellow cast mate and former Love Island star Ekin-Su Cülcüloğlu, “Where is Kate?”

Despite various media updates regarding the royal’s abdominal surgery, which she underwent at the beginning of the year, and her subsequent pull back from public duties, Kate’s uncle seemed unprepared for the question, offering a fumbled and bizarre reply.

“So, because she doesn’t want to talk about it, the last thing I’m going to do is …” Goldsmith started, adding that there was a “code of etiquette” when discussing the British royal family.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
Goldsmith then hinted that something was not right, going on to say, “If it’s announced, I’ll give you an opinion”, reports Daily Mail.

His response immediately sparked concern over why he’d have “an opinion” if the Princess of Wales is only resting following abdominal surgery, doing little to tone down the rampant conspiracy theories surrounding her “disappearance”.

Gary Goldsmith, 52, the Duchess of Cambridge's uncle, in Englefield, England. Photo / AP
Gary Goldsmith, 52, the Duchess of Cambridge's uncle, in Englefield, England. Photo / AP

Middleton, 42, went in for her surgery on January 16, and remained in a London hospital for two weeks.

Despite Kensington Palace releasing a statement saying the surgery had been “planned”, suspicion grew when the Princess and her husband pulled out of various royal commitments, making people question how “planned” the operation was.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
What’s more, a palace spokesperson said the Princess of Wales would likely be taking time out for a couple of months while she healed.

Prior to March 5, when Kate was snapped by paparazzi sitting in the passenger seat of a car with her mum Carole Middleton, the royal hadn’t been seen by the public since Christmas Day.

Rumours started to swirl surrounding Kate’s disappearance from the public eye last week, which saw a number of conspiracy theories being spread online.